[Do not merge] Add Kyuubi deployment guide (#112)
canonical/spark-k8s-bundle: releases/3.4/yaml/docs/how-to/h-deploy-kyuubi.md

# Deploy Apache Kyuubi

Charmed Apache Spark can work with [Apache Kyuubi](https://kyuubi.apache.org/), which is a distributed and multi-tenant gateway to provide serverless SQL on lakehouses.
The following guide is to set up Apache Kyuubi for running SQL queries with Charmed Apache Spark.

## Prerequisites

To continue, make sure that you have a properly set up K8s environment with [Juju](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/3.6/).

See the [How to setup K8s environment](/t/11618) guide for instructions on how to set up with different cloud providers or follow our the [Environment setup](/t/13233) page in our Tutorial to set up a microk8s environment.

Check that the environment is ready by running a built-in SQL client from `spark-client`:

```bash
spark-client.spark-sql --username spark --namespace spark
```

> Wait for the command to finish initialising and you should see a prompt for SQL queries by `spark-client`:

Reviewer: I think the `spark-sql` here is a bit tangential and doesn't connect much with what we're going to do next in the guide.

Reviewer: The existence of the service account with appropriate permissions should be the enough pretext for Kyuubi to work, since everything else are supposed to be handled automatically by the charm itself.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/canonical/spark-k8s-bundle/pull/112/commits/ba45e6cf96b4e7c8fa37a7d12a37bcc261c5a9f3

```bash
spark-sql (default)> 
```

Exit the prompt by pushing `Ctrl + C` and continue to the Kyuubi initial setup below.

## Initial setup

Check the list of models available:

```bash
juju models
```

Add a new Juju model:

```bash
juju add-model kyuubi
```

Deploy the Apache Kyuubi charm:

```bash
juju deploy kyuubi-k8s --trust --channel=latest/edge
```

Open a new terminal window/tab and run the following for a persistent view of the model status:

```bash
juju status --watch=1s
```

> Wait for the `kyuubi-k8s` app to have the `blocked` status.

Reviewer: I'd also explain why Kyuubi is in `blocked` status with the message `Missing integration hub relation`, describe a little bit about the role of integration hub, and then proceed to install integration hub.

Get back to the previous terminal, then deploy the `spark-integration-hub-k8s`:

```bash
juju deploy spark-integration-hub-k8s --trust --channel=latest/edge
```

Wait for it to initialise (change its status from `waiting` to `active`) and integrate the two charms:

```bash
juju integrate kyuubi-k8s spark-integration-hub-k8s
```

> You should see the `blocked` status with the `Missing Object Storage backend` message.

Reviewer: It's also worth to explain why Kyuubi stays in `blocked` status with this message, and why an object storage is so important to Kyuubi that it goes to blocked state in its absence.

## Object storage setup

> To set up an object storage backend, deploy S3 integrator:

Reviewer: Maybe worth explaining there are two possiblities for object storage -- S3 and Azure Storage, and then proceeding forward saying we are going forward with S3 in this case, for which the credentials are ingested in the Juju model using the s3-integrator charm.

Reviewer: Sure, it is somewhat similar to what we did with the `s3-integrator`.

You first deploy `azure-storage-integrator` charm:

```bash
juju deploy azure-storage-integrator
```

For configuring the credentials, you first need to create a Juju secret, and then provide that secret to the charm as:

```bash
juju add-secret somename secret-key=XXXXXXX
juju grant-secret somename azure-storage-integrator

juju config azure-storage-integrator credentials=<secret-uri-from-first-step>
juju config azure-storage-integrator storage-account=XXXX container=XXXX
```

And finally integrate it with the integration hub

```bash
juju integrate spark-integration-hub-k8s azure-storage-integrator
```

Author: Added in https://github.com/canonical/spark-k8s-bundle/pull/112/commits/b56192ddd56d8190807e06c33421d48a061a64fd

```bash
juju deploy s3-integrator
```

> After the integrator is deployed, you need to configure it to use your object storage by setting up endpoint address, bucket, path to folder, and credentials:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the S3 integrator is deployed, you need to configure it to use your S3 object storage by setting up endpoint address, bucket, path to folder, and credentials:
```

```text
juju config s3-integrator endpoint=<ADDRESS> bucket=<BUCKET-NAME> path=<FOLDER-NAME>
juju run s3-integrator/leader sync-s3-credentials access-key=<ACCESS-KEY> secret-key=<SECRET-KEY>
```

As a result, the message `ok: Credentials successfully updated.` should appear.

Now it's time to integrate the `s3-integrator` charm:

```bash
juju integrate s3-integrator spark-integration-hub-k8s
```

> After that, `kyuubi-k8s` app becomes blocked with the `Missing authentication database relation` message.

Reviewer: Similar to above, worth explaining why this happens, and what is the role of external Postgres database in this case of authentication.

## Authentication database setup

For the Apache Kyuubi to work with Charmed Apache Spark, it needs a `postgresql-k8s` charm deployed and serve as its authentication database.

Deploy and integrate the database charm:

```bash
juju deploy postgresql-k8s --channel=14/stable --trust
juju integrate kyuubi-k8s:auth-db postgresql-k8s
```

Wait for all statuses to become `active`.

> 

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/canonical/spark-k8s-bundle/pull/112/commits/3629c4e8e3bcbb700ab87cace8fdb8aa41595848

## Connect

Expose the `kyuubi-k8s` app for external connection:

```bash
juju config kyuubi-k8s expose-external=loadbalancer
```

Get database connection details:

```bash
juju run kyuubi-k8s/leader get-jdbc-endpoint
juju run kyuubi-k8s/leader get-password
```

Finally, use the external endpoint address and database password to connect with your JDBC-compliant tool of choice:

```bash
beeline -u <ENDPOINT> -n admin -p <PASSWORD>
```

### Connection example

For example, you can use the beeline tool that is a part of the Charmed Apache Kyuubi charm.
We recommend deploying a new, dedicated Kyuubi app for that:

```bash

> juju deploy kyuubi-k8s --channel=latest/edge --trust beeline

Reviewer: Some good news here: we are going to have the `beeline` tool exposed as part of `spark-client` snap very soon in the future. Here is the PR that's ongoing for that: https://github.com/canonical/spark-client-snap/pull/112

Once it gets merged and releasedl, one can invoke beeline as simply as `spark-client.beeline ...` instead of having to deploy a new charm and sshing into it to do `/opt/kyuubi/bin/beeline ...` :)

```

Wait for the new app to become `blocked`, but don't integrate it to anything.
Instead, open its SSH terminal, enter bash, and run the beeline tool from inside:

```bash
juju ssh --container=kyuubi beeline/0
bash
/opt/kyuubi/bin/beeline -u jdbc:hive2://10.41.189.148:10009/ -n admin -p 06yJY5OkhcxVhQ0C
```

Wait a few minutes for the Apache Kyuubi to start.
You will see log output with `Pending` phase while kubernetes pods are starting:

```text
25/05/27 18:29:05 INFO LoggingPodStatusWatcherImpl: Application status for spark-7244f14bac9e4e3f9c505143f4dce374 (phase: Pending)
```

After the intialisation is complete, you will get the Beeline version and prompt:

```text
Connected to: Spark SQL (version 3.4.2)
Driver: Kyuubi Project Hive JDBC Client (version 1.10.1)
Beeline version 1.10.1 by Apache Kyuubi
0: jdbc:hive2://10.41.189.148:10009/> 
```

> You can run your SQL commands now, for example: `show databases;`.

Reviewer: Also worth adding some more SQL commands for the sanity test.

At least

```
CREATE TABLE test (id int);
INSERT INTO test VALUES (34);
SELECT * FROM test;
```

Author: Expanded the SQL queries in https://github.com/canonical/spark-k8s-bundle/pull/112/commits/d752eb47b784ca08ce8b259aa29415963b22938a

# Deploy Apache Kyuubi

Charmed Apache Spark can work with [Apache Kyuubi](https://kyuubi.apache.org/), which is a distributed and multi-tenant gateway to provide serverless SQL on lakehouses.
The following guide is to set up Apache Kyuubi for running SQL queries with Charmed Apache Spark.

## Prerequisites

To continue, make sure that you have a properly set up Charmed Apache Spark K8s environment with [Juju](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/3.6/).

See the [How to setup K8s environment](/t/11618) guide for instructions on how to set up with different cloud providers or follow our the [Environment setup](/t/13233) page in our Tutorial to set up a microk8s environment.

To check that environment is ready, run:

```bash

> spark-client.service-account-registry get-config --username spark --namespace spark 

Author: It is created in the Tutorial as part of the setup. It was suggested earlier by Enrico in the [previous thread](https://github.com/canonical/spark-k8s-bundle/pull/112#discussion_r2113863950) about the check. I'm all up for removing the check completely. The simpler, the better.

## Object storage setup

Kyuubi currently supports two mutually-exclusive backends for the object storage:

* S3-compatible storage
* Azure DataLake storage

Please see the following sections for guidance on how to configure each.

### S3

For S3-compliant storage, deploy [S3 integrator](https://charmhub.io/s3-integrator):

```bash
juju deploy s3-integrator
```

Configure S3 integrator to use your S3 object storage by setting up endpoint address, bucket, path to folder, and credentials:

```text
juju config s3-integrator endpoint=<ADDRESS> bucket=<BUCKET-NAME> path=<FOLDER-NAME>
juju run s3-integrator/leader sync-s3-credentials access-key=<ACCESS-KEY> secret-key=<SECRET-KEY>
```

As a result, the message `ok: Credentials successfully updated.` should appear.

Now it's time to integrate the `s3-integrator` charm:

```bash
juju integrate s3-integrator spark-integration-hub-k8s
```

After that, `kyuubi-k8s` app becomes blocked with the `Missing authentication database relation` message.

### Azure DataLake

For Azure DataLake storage, deploy [Azure storage integrator](https://charmhub.io/azure-storage-integrator):

```bash
juju deploy azure-storage-integrator
```

> Create a Juju secret with storage's secret key and grant access to the charm:

Author: ```suggestion
Create a Juju secret containing the Azure Storage account secret key, and grant the charm access to this secret.
```
